Lecture 2
Pre-History to Babylonian Astrology
=================

Ishango Bone (10000 BCE)
--------------
Although there's no good starting point, we'll choose to begin with the Ishango
Bone, which is a stone with two sides with 60 engravings on both of them. This
seems to correlate to modern-day calendars, since each moon cycle lasts 29/30
days.

This stands as evidence that people are beginning to predict or notice and
create data about the things going on around them (observation). As mentioned
last time, this is by far not the first such evidence, but it's one good piece.

Polynesian Navigation
---------------------
Practically, the reason people would want to track the cycles of the sun is for
navigation purposes. The sun does a daily arc that gets higher and higher as
summer gets closer. As long as you know where the sun is and where some
constellations are, you can find your way and figure out what direction you're
going in.

However, some cultures went far beyond this, seemingly impractically.
Specifically Mesopotamia, which will be the focus for the remainder of this.

The Fertile Crescent
-----------------------

A crescent in geography that had Egypt, Mesopotamia, Babylonia and other cities.
Development driven by lots of rivers in the area, causing agriculture to
flourish.

The Gobekli Tepe
-------------------

An incredible, intricately carved monument with animals on it that shows
evidence of large social organization, division of labor and agriculture. We can
tell that agriculture was around because when agriculture flourishes, people
tend to settle down and create cities/defenses, leading to division of labor.

Counting Tokens
--------------------

Dated to around 8000BCE. Rocks with markings on them indicating a numerical
system that allowed people to count. Used for thousands of years. Could have
been used to count agricultural stuff, like how many oats have been planted.

Thousands of years later, evolved into a system where counting tokens inside an
envelope were indicated using impressions on clay. Then thousands of years after
that evolved to just impressions without the counting tokens.

This leads to writing in 3200 BCE.

Mesopotamian Writing
---------------------

3200 BCE. Important for showing us the evolution of counting into impressions
used to indicate some form of communication.

Babylonian Counting System
--------------------------

2000 BCE. Shows a form of concisely writing large quantities quickly using
patterns of markings. Base 60.

Trivia: this is why clocks count 60 seconds in a minute and 60 minutes in an
hour, we're still using the Babylonian Counting System.

Neo-Assyrian Empire
-----------------------

Resembles the Fertile Crescent, which makes sense because ancient cultures would
always develop around rivers where it was easier for agriculture to thrive.

Expanded heavily from 824 BC to 671 BC as the society believed that they were
the universal culture and decided to conquer other cultures as much as possible.

Ashurbanipal (668 - 627 BCE) and his Wise Men
--------------

A king. Built a library where he tried to accumulate all the culture from all the
societies that had been conquered. We also find evidence of correspondence
between his men and him, giving us a view into the state.

From one of these correspondences we find that they were able to predict lunar
eclipses by around 700 BCE.

From another correspondence, we find that they were observing the movement of
the planets, and observing that planets appear together in the sky.
They don't really have a model of figuring out the underlying mechanics of
what's going on, but they still are able to predict through tables and
calculations.

Why would Ashurbanipal care about any of this?
Not because they're just watching natural events, but because they are watching
for omens. Unusual events that they didn't predict are considered acts from the
gods, showing that things are going wrong. This drove a large amount of the
actions of the king.

Types of Men:
  - scribe-diviner: primitive mathematician, predicted the activity of the stars
  - celestial diviner: interprets the star movements when they vary from
    predictions
  - magician exorcist: casts spells to exorcise omens
  - dream interpreter: has elaborate methods of taking parts out of the king's
    dream and interpreting what they mean.
  - haruspex: Examines the livers of sheep and gazelles to interpret the will of
    the gods.

There's a strange relation between observation and theory here.
We have the Venus Tablet from 1500 BCE, tablet 63 of Enuma Anu Enlil, which
shows the dates of the first and last visibility of Venus over 21 years.

However, are they just observations? Actually, things might be backwwards.

For example, examining the calendar, the ideal 360 days a year and 30 days a
month would be completely inaccurate, to the point that nobody could have
believed it to be accurate. The scribes would have to stick an extra month into
the year to make things work. The more likely interpretation is that they
believed that this was an ideal model of the world and that any deviation was
signs from the god.

So people were driven to make actual observations, but they would always be
driven by theoretical ideals of how the world should function (theory driving
observation, not observation driving theory).

However, eventually someone worked it out and created an astrological chart that
correlated the positions of the planets to the way people would behave based on
their birthdate. This shows us that they figured out how to predict where the
planets would be years in advance, bringing doubt to the idea that the positions
of the planets were a sign from the gods.

A major job of the court mathematician was to divine the astrological sign of a
person. This shows that this lasted for 2300 years, beginning around 500 BCE.

The Archaemenid Empire (550 BCE)
----------------------

Considered the bad guys of the Persian empires, although much better than the
Assyrians. Didn't make particular advancements to science, but they had an idea
of how things should be ruled that drove a lot of advancement: instead of
killing or assimilating the people they conquered, they would allow them to keep
their culture and their language while simply paying taxes. They could even keep
the same people in charge if they agreed with being conquered. This allowed
people to travel safely, allowing scholars to transfer knowledge from one
culture to another. Conversation between people with different values drives
productive, objective discussion that advances the state of science.

This let them conquer a lot of land over 400 years because it was a more
friendly empire.

Surprisingly, this doesn't mean that science is driven by peace -- actually,
some of the most scientific periods were driven by turmoil, leading to people
from different cultures interacting.

Early Chinese Astrology and Alchemy
===================================

Has a surprising amount of similarities with Greece advancements.
Dynasties range from 20000 BCE - 1911 CE.
In particular, the Spring and Autumn and the Warring Dynasties period lead a
great deal of advancement.

Early Chinese Writing
---------------------

Symbols found on oracle bones from 6600 - 6200 BCE give evidence of
protowriting, showing notes of things such as birds, eyes, lines.

We see more formal forms of writing with the Shang Dynasty Oracle Bone (1600 -
1050 BCE), where people would write symbols onto a piece of bone and the cracks
would lead predictions about the future. The bone gives dates for what day would
be good for things such as childbirth, and also gives predictions about the
results/outcome of the subject.

Bamboo Books
------------------

Innovation from around the Warring Dynasty period, around 300 BCE. Each stick of
bamboo carries a long string of characters, leading to an efficient and
effective use of space.

People and Dates
------------------

The 100 Schools: 475 BCE - 220 BCE

Kongzi: 551 - 479 BCE 
Concerned with politics and the way that people should behave themselves. His
philosophy was about obtaining social harmony.

Laozi: 500 BCE ???
The founder of Daoism (going with the flow).

Mozi: 470 - 391 BCE
One of the first groups of real Chinese scientists. Concerned with subjects
such as optics and how shadows will fall.

Zou Yan: 305 BCE - 240 BCE
Credited with synthesizing the Yin-Yang theory along with the Wu Xing theory of
five elements or processes of transform (Water, Wood, Fire, Metal, Earth). Not
strictly states of being, but instead phases of transformation as time passes.

Huge amounts of what's known in Chinese science is based entirely around this
interaction chart.

Metal => Water => Wood => Fire => Earth => ...
Metal -> Wood -> Earth -> Water -> Fire -> ...

This is applied towards classifying everything. Each planet has an element. Each
emotion has an element. Each organ has an element. Each stage of life has an
element. Everything has an element.

We can also see them develop anathestics and weed. yes, marijuana.

The Unification of China
-----------------------

For most of its history, China was not one unified nation. In 221 BCE, Qin
defeated the rest of the states, establishing complete control over China for
the first time. This was not a good time for scholars. Qin is an ambiguous
figure -- on one hand, he's the first person who could be considered an emperor
of China, and did set up the conditions that allowed China to be overthrown and
unified. On the other, he was also a jerk who killed everyone who disagreed
with him, particularly Confuscious scholar. The period after him was quite a
good period for scholars.

Han Astrology/Astronomy
------------------------

During the Han Dynasty (206 BCE - 220 AD), we find instruments for making
astronomical observations using markings and pins. Their calendar system
involved adding seven months every 19 years, and nailed the time within a few
hours. This would be adopted into European culture later on.

Zhou Bi Suan Jing
--------------------

Geometry is established and applied towards measuring the distance between the
sun and the earth and correlating the shadows that would be cast. Unfortunately,
the model that was created only worked if the Earth was flat, which it is not.

One common argument leveraged against China for why modern science was not
developed there was that they were too focused on the practical and not on the
theoretical, however, we can see through developments like this that that was
not necessarily the case.

The Mandate of Heaven
---------------------

The emperor was considered the son of heaven, a special sort of human who
mediates between the earth and the cosmos.

Like in Mesopotamia, omens were thought to be updates on how the Emperor was
doing at his job. They had similar elaborate forms of divination.

Han Cosmological Theories
---------------------

There's a division in Chinese thinking in the era between the picture of the
cosmos through theories and the practical calculation tables. There are three
theories we focus on:

    Gai tian: The heaven and earth are two plates running around eachother.

    Hun tian: The earth lies alone in the center, like the yolk of the hen's
    egg (the heavens being the egg)

    Xuan ye: Earth and the other heavenly bodies float in infinite empty space.
    The author of the book thinks this is interesting because it resembles what
    we think today, where the Earth is a body floating in a lot of empty space
    being moved around by invisible forces. It's a very naturalistic view where
    qi is being used universally to represent any kind of force and energy
    without focusing on dividing into different types of qi.

Chinese Alchemy
--------------

In Han Dynasty, the compass was invented through the form of metal being melted.
In the Song Dynasty, gunpowder is created, advanced through an important
material of which there were great quantities in the Chinese mines. Gunpowder is
composed of sulfer, charcoal and saltpeter, and saltpeter was readily available.

Chinese Mechanics
------------------

Han Dynasty: Earthquake detector. Earthquakes were seen as a very dire omen that
the Emperor would have to respond to immediately.

Spring and Autumn Period: Repeating Crossbow, allowing people to fire off
multiple bolts rapidly. Traditional views of science see the world in terms of
mechanisms composed of many small working parts, and the standard narrative
argues that this is a Western way of thinking, an analytical approach. This
fails to explain the history of how things actually went down, since China was
better at creating practical tools and weapons.
