\section{Lecture 6 - 03/06/14}
\subsection{The Printing Press and Vesalius}

At this point there is a developing knowledge network in europe. There is a
series of institutions of higher learning emerging although you might not be
too impressed by these institutions. The main intellectual movement was around
the idea that faith and reason can be brought together and mutually inform and
benefit each other. This basically grounded down into the work of Aristotle and
Plato and a lot of christian theology was taught. A lot of the book copying at
this time was done in christian monastary but the demand starts going up so a
new class of scribes and papermakers emerages. These artisans become a seperate
group from the church. At this point making parchment is a bitch to do. Take
over a week to make 1 to 2 pages of parchment. The problem with increasing
literacy as it takes thousands and thousands and goats to make 1 bible, so it's
not praticle without paper making and the printing press.
 
\subsubsection{Europe's Economy}

From 1200 to 1500 the population pretty much doubles. We have some
technological advances fueling this, water wheels for example; water wheels
mostly grind grain but there were some industrial applications. This is the
period where universites start popping up. The actual labour required to keep
people alive is lessened so more people start getting educated. Meanwhile in
china the mongolian empire is just destorying china. Around 1300 the population
does peak and starts to decline with the black death. (bubonic plague) The
black death in 4 years kills about half of all europeans which is basically the
same as half of the economy disapearing. It's absolutly devasting to society.
It created a labour shortage and the cost labour goes up massivly; as an ironic
side effect the lower classes get a serious economic boost. This makes the idea
of labour saving devices very attractive.
 
\subsubsection{Gutenberg}

He was around 1395-1468. The printing press absolutely dwarfs all previous
events in how it improves how much information can be stored and
transmitted.\footnote{At this point we can start getting quantative about what
happens} The output of printed works starts exponentially increasing. Gutenberg
invented the printing press. The first book he printed was the bible. The
second was a textbook of latin grammar. Now you don't need a professional
scribe to make copies of things. You can just make one copy and send it to a
printing press. By the end of this course (18th century) we're just below 50\%
literacy. It's worth noting that there are way more people though is worth
noting as the raw number of people who were literate is significantly higher
than the population of the earth previous.
 
It was not a struggle to get people to understand why printing should be a
thing. When it first showed up in 1450, within 50 years it's everywhere. There
could very easily be multiple in a city. There were sometimes be specialized
print shops, like shops for printing bibles or printing scientific works. The
printing press was a composite of pre-existing technology. It combined things
like wine pressing, block printing\footnote{It's actually not that new of an
idea} and evenign the idea of moving type isn't new. The chinese had Movable
Type Printing as early as 1045. Gutenberg didn't invent any particular thing,
he just combined a bunch of elements into one thing. The really radical change
is the way people start thinking about books and learning in general.
 
\subsubsection{Martin Luther and the Reformation}

He protested a lot of things of the catholic church that he thought were bad.
Luther's '95 Theses' are printed and spread widely. At this point all bibles
are in latin and all catholic masses. So if you're in one of the non-educated
classes (so everyone) you wouldn't know latin and would just sit there and have
no clue what is going on. Luther thinks that's wrong so he gets his friends to
finish a German translation of the bible. The printing press spreads control of
things around. If you didn't like the form the bible was in when it was handed
to you, you can rewrite it. At this point, deviations from tradition is viewed
as recapturing the ancient glory. At this point older is better. Let's not
suggest that the printing press just threw away all traditions.
 
\subsubsection{Andreas Vesalius}

He was around 1514 - 1564. At this time there were two books: The Book of
Scripture and The Book of Nature. The printing press radically changes the
relationship with the book of scripture. If you were a doctor you still knew
your Galen which was around 1000 years ago. He wanted current medical
literature which you know makes a fuckload of sense. Before Vasalius nce a year
or so the doctors would gather around do a public disection. A license would be
optained form teh Vicar of the Pope. It would typically be the body of a
executed criminal (dissection was considered part of the punishment) and it
must all be regulated by the college of doctors. It would be done mostly in the
winter so the body wouldn't get bad so fast. The place would be prepared with
instruments. While this is happening some guy is reading from galen, the guy
actually doing the cutting is a barber or surgeon as there is still this class
between the learn'd doctor and the person who is cutting. If this
barber/surgeon found something not in the textbook he couldn't say anything.
The knowledge was static. It was just a showing of what Galen said in a vivid
way. Vesalious thought this was wrong.
 
Vesalius outragged and horrified by this dogmatic approach to anatomy. He wrote
a book called "De Humani Corpris Fabrica" (1543) and on the cover was a picture
of Vesalius of him actually doing disections. When he actually starts doing
dissections he finds some things that galen said that are just wrong. 1543 is a
good date to remember as it's the same year that Copernicus's book gets
published. This book is also a technical trimpuh as the pcitures were very
detailed. So he found the "Rete Mirable" does not exist in humans, it exists in
a lot of mammals, Galen dissected a lot of animals and infered to humans. It
had been noticed that it wasn't there before but they just assumed it
disapeared after death. Vesalius starts saying that we have to rethink how a
lot of these things work, he dosen't nesc. have a answer to these problems but
he brings forth the problem.
 
\subsection{Copernicus}

He's a pretty tragic figure when you look at his life. He's a significantly sad
man. He had so little confidence in the thing he created he didn't let it be
published for 30 years. A lot of evidence would of suggested that if he had
heard about the copernican revelution he would of hated it. Near the end of his
life he was allowed to see his book finally published. Reports differ as to
weather or not he was pleased by it, or even if he was able to recognize it.
This weird polish monk is the center of the story of the scientific revolution.
 
He's the turning point as he's credited with turning the earth literally upside
down. Ptolomy was still the core to astronomy. Ptolemy wasn't trying to create
a accurate model of how the stars work he was trying to 'save the appearances'
and create a model that represents how the stars work. He also had notions that
planets always move at the same speed. He also was the guy with the equant.
Copernicus hates the whole equant. He is a hard core aristoliean. He was all
about the the perfect circles, he wants to be true to aristotle. He has a dash
of neo-platonism. Neo-platonists were particularly fond of the sun, and
sometimes threw around the idea that the sun was at the centre of the universe.
Ptolemy's system was pretty complicated and this partially motived Copernicus.
Amusingly Copernicus' system was arugably more complicated.
 
So Copernicus sets out to make a new model but he wasn't very much of a fan of
it. He was a reluctant revolutionary. He wasn't afriad of religious persuction,
learn'd men of the church were well aware of his ideas and they tried to
convince him to publish. There was really no religious persuction to the idea
that the earth moves around the sun. There are a few people who don't like the
idea but there always is.
 
\subsubsection{The Commentorialis}

This is basically a abridged version of his actual book that he let ciruclate
while he was alive.
 
\begin{enumerate}

\item There is no one center of all the celestial circles or sphere 

\item The center of the earth is the center of the universe but only of gravity and the
lunar sphere 

\item All the spheres revolve around the sun 

\item The distance from the earth to the sun in imperceptible in comparison
with the distance to the firmament 

\item Whatever motion we see in the firmament is not of the
firmament but of the earths movement. Basically the earth is spinning.

\item This one basically says that earth is a planet like every other planet,
this really upsets the great chain of being. This was in some regards a good
thing.  Before earth was the worst part of the universe, not it's just like the
rest everything else. The world now exists for it's own sake and just moves
through empty space.  

\item The motion of the earth alone, therefore suffices to explain so many
apparently inequalites in the heavens.

\end{enumerate}
 
Stellar Parallax is the idea that you should see stars shifting relative to
each other. However we don't see that so the 4th rule is derived.
 
\subsubsection{De revolutionibus orbium colestium}

His actual textbook published in 1543. It wasn't immediatly taken up and that
was reasonable given the time. Still most of the leading mathematicians and
astronomers would have copies. They didn't care so much about the philosophical
stuff, there were some really good calculation techniques that people really
liked. A quiet debate about this is happening but nothing serious. 67 Years
later with Galieo shows up and makes this hyped.
