\section{Lecture 9 - 12/06/14}
\subsection{Newton}

Just prior to Newton a lot of people were trying to do something new, but they
were all doing it in different ways and it was kind of a mess. When Newton
publishes his laws he, at least appears to, unify all of it and sorts the mess
out.
 
\subsubsection{Galileo}

But talking about that mess Galileo wrote: "A motion is said to be uniformly
acelerated when starting from rest, it acquires, during equal time-intervals,
equal increments of speed" The math for idea of uniform acceleration started
becoming a thing although they didn't have a proper mathematical basis for it.
This was contrary to aristotle who thought that heavier things fall faster.
Galileo proved it wrong without even experiement.
 
Suppose you have 2 balls, 1 heavier than the other. So according to aristotle
the heaver one should fall faster. So now add a very tiny thread to attach the 2
balls. Then the new system should fall at the combined weight of the 2 balls.
Which well lol.
 
Galileo is amusingly an old school copernicus guy. He's all about perfect
circles, epicycles, silly shit.
 
\subsubsection{Kepler}

Heliocentricism was pretty standard and accepted at this point. Kepler didn't
understand why ellipses. One of his attempted suggestions is a sweeping force
from the sun. He had a pseduo-gravity explanation, but it wasn't all that
accurate.
 
\subsubsection{Descartes}

His most worthwhile contribution is the concept that rest is not more
fundamental than motion. Which is to say that both rest and motion are natural.
So I guess that's helpful. He dosen't believe in empty space. Well that's less
helpful.
 
\subsubsection{Life of Newton}

He was born December 25th. When he was 19 he made a list of all his sins from
his past life. He was seen a sober and silent boy, he would build mechanisms
that were powered by a mouse running on a treadmill. Being pratical and learn'd
was realitvly new at the time. He was pretty bad at running the estate. In 1661
he went to Cambridge University, they still taught the works of Aristotle but
had started to move onto Descartes etc. Newton once said something along the
lines of "Plato is my friend, Aristotle is my friend but truth is a even greater
friend".
 
He started playing with optics. It was mostly about finding the relationship
between mind and body. He would close one eye and stare at the sun for as long
as he could. Apparently it hurt. He was weird even by the standard of the day.
He did some other optics experiments with prisms. He famously showed that white
light is made up of all the colours. He made a refelcting telescope. Which is a
base design that is the basis for basically all telescopes even today.
 
If you looked at his library, 27\% of it was Theological and 10\% was Alchemy
where as only 7\% and 3\% are for Math and Physics respectivly.
 
\subsubsection{The Royal Society}

He definately got into conflict with other people. One of the jobs of the royal
society was to confirm other experiements. They couldn't replicate Newtons prism
experiment. He had spent so much time with his theories that it had just become
obvious to him so he quickly lost patience with people who didn't understand it.
He felt very uneasy about the Royal Society. Newton is seen as one of the
biggest challenges to the Royal Society. He is often seen as the first true
scientist although it would also be fair to see him as "the last magician" as a
BBC documentary put it.
 
 
\subsection{The Royal Society}

A lot of new methodology and attitudes are being produced. This is a really good
time for science and it's heating up in a really big way. These scientific
societies start showing up. The basic structure was that you'd bring ideas to
the society, you'd all review it, once everyone had accepted it they'd publish
it in some sort of journal. Which is a very modern thing. It's a consensus
amungst scientist instead of wealthy elites. It also tries to get rid of biases.
It's worth noting that this is royal. It's chartered by the king and it's still
a product of its time. It's made up of people that aren't of the lowest class.
They published some stuff... you know like a table of all the times at which
there was high tide at london bridge.
 
Once a week, they'd all gather, have dinner and watch the latest experiment
happen in front of them. When something new would happen they could, collect
results, check those results and distribute them quickly and easily.
 
\subsubsection{Nullius in Verba}

Means take no ones word for it or take nothing in speach. It's not just about
not trusting random people, it's about not trusting even there peers. Socially
prior, to question people could be seen as an insult to their honor. So this was
a drastically different way of looking at things. Nullius in Verba is also a way
to deal with some of the philosophical stuff. They only really looked at things
that were observable so you couldn't really get into philosophical debate about
it\footnote{or you could but they didn't}.
 
\subsubsection{Robert Boyle}

He was around 1627-1691. He is most famous for Boyles Law, that relates
pressure. He would evacuate as much of the air from a container as he could.
Then he would put other stuff in there, like a mercury barometer. He also put
candles in it, and they would go out. He proved that it was absolutely
essential. He also noticed that butterflys couldn't fly without air. Mice,
somewhat amusingly, died. Better yet: magnets still worked!
 
\subsubsection{Christiaan Huygens}

He was around 1629-1695. Anyone who does science these days know you do a ton of
statistics. Huygens was one of the first people to start developing a
statistical system. He also invented a pendulum and a spring drive clock.
 
\subsubsection{Robert Hooke}

He was around 1635-1703. Apparently there is no known pictures of him. He is
like the arch nemesis of Newton. He is best known for his microscopic work. He
publishes a book called Micrographia (1665) that discuss microscopic stuff. It
has a ton of illustrations of things seen through a microscope. These
illustations are far too detailed for what he actually saw. These were
reconstructions of what he thought they were. This stuff was very disturbing at
the time, as it made small things complex. People believed in spontaneous life
appearing. When these small animals became complex it became hard to justify
that.
 
\subsubsection{Anton Leeuenhoek}

Random extra person. He was just some dude who sold cloth. He noticed that some
of the glass beads he used in clothing would magnify things. He made a one lens
microscope. He was getting 250x magnification from it. He does eventually get
recognized in the royal society.
 
\subsubsection{The Fateful Dinner}

In 1685 some royal society members were having a dinner. They were discussing
keplers elipses. There were many circles that looked like eclipses but they
didn't know why. Hooke claimed to know it but didn't tell them. Most evidence
suggests he didn't. Haley became really interested in this question and he talks
to newton about it. The idea that gravity follows an inverse square law has been
floating around. Newton said he had calculated it, he couldn't find his papers,
procedes to go reformulate it and then 2 years later produces, well a better
answer than anyone could of hoped for.
 
\subsubsection{Newton and the Mechnical Philosophy}

This seemed really bad for the whole Mechanical philosophy. It says there is a
force everywhere in the universe that attract all matter to other matter. The
idea of it acting at a distance very strange.
 
\subsubsection{Liebniz}

Liebniz invented calculus around the same time so there was a priorty dispute
about it. The royal society decied to figure it out. However this initive was
let by Newton so yea Liebniz got ignored.
 
\subsubsection{Two Views of Human Happiness}

Scientific societies saw it as their duty to make us better and happier. They
saw happiness as having more stuff. The idea that consumers like to consume
things and we need more things to consume. Before that happiness was about not
having that much, not knowing that much and being fine. The idea that people are
happy when things are stable. That isn't that crazy of an idea when you think of
it. The fact that new things happen all the time was not always true. Bacon
brought forward the idea that we should constantly try to improve everything.
This is a profoundly new way of approaching human happiness.
