Lecture 3
Evolution
===================

Charles Darwin (1834)
---------------------
When you think of Darwin, you think of Charles, but there were a long line of
them, including Erasmus the poet, who was also into math and biology.

Erasmus advocated in his poems that species change. This was an idea that was
around, but not widely accepted at all. For the most part people believed that
stuff had just been put there somehow, say by God.

He did not discuss natural selection, but he started to get there. 

Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (1744-1829)
-------------------------------
One important day: 1859 (memorize: Origin of Species publication date).

Lamarck believed in evolution of his species. Had a theory about spontaneous
generation where living beings came to life from non-living beings via
electricity.

The Voltic Pile was developed after people were experimenting with frogs to get
them to jump via electric shock. He says this life force drives species to
change, to become progressively more complicated.

His view of change is inheritence of changing characteristics. His famous
example is the giraffe, where the giraffe stretches its neck progressively more
and more to reach the trees.

Putting these ideas out earlier primed society for an acceptance of Darwin's
theories. On their own, they had merit, but weren't accepted.

Vestiges of The Natural History of Creation
----------------------

Published entirely anonymously, actually written by Robert Chambers. Great
publicity move, people were constantly guessing who it was. Chambers wrote this
keeping in mind a middle class who wanted more than they could get from society,
wanted it to be used to argue that their progress from a middle to a higher
class was a natural one.

Species have children of the same species that are exactly alike. Not much
changes in the everyday. But every once in a while, a higher level law kicks in
that bounces the embryo up to a higher level of complexity in the womb. New
characteristics are acquired.

This is when people start talking about evolution and people start forming
opinions on it. Conversation takes off.

Debate about whether or not these are evolutionary forerunners or something
different. Some people argue that since Darwin used the scientific method much
more than Erasmus, Lamarck, Chambers, he was a true scientist and the rest were
just going off of random reason.

Charles Darwin
------------------

He studied a lot of things not in his curriculum, as a clergy. Zooology, botany,
etc. Got a position from his professors on the HMS Beagle to travel far away for
five years. Takes Lyell's book with him and reads it repeatedly over and over
again. Trained as a catastrophist. Thinks that if the geology is changing slowly
over time, why not animals as well? Lyell thought they were fixed, Darwin thinks
they are constantly changing.

Sees a lot on this voyage, including the Galapogos islands. Charting the coast
and the waters off South Africa. Darwin would often get off and explore South
Africa and regroup with the Beagle later.

Almost misses crucial evidence that on islands, the species vary dramatically.
Diagrams finches, their beaks, heads and shapes. People say that the finches
that vary are different species, God was creating individual finches for each
island in the world. Darwin thinks there can be a better explanation.

Went to people who bred pigeons as a hobby, in different colors. He asked how
you could breed a pigeon that has a bigger beak for digging holes better. Turns
out you need to breed some types of pigeons with bigger beaks with each other,
People thought this was an artificial process, not something that occurs
naturally.

Thomas Malthus
---------------
Publishes essays on the history of natural selection. Created a graph about
population and food, and how population always exceeds the amount of food over
time, meaning that there will always be a struggle for food, and that some
people will always be in poverty. He used this to justify the class structure,
writing about the tribes of Asia. Provides Darwin a means of importing
artificial selection into a natural selection. Bases a large amount of his
argument on the question of what pressures bring species together with amounts
of variation that enable them to survive.

For Darwin, this force was the necessity of food.
Did significant research on barnacles, known for that until he receives a letter
from...

Alfred Russel Wallace (1823 - 1913)
-----------------------------

Gives Darwin a manuscript he's working on to receive useful feedback, because
Darwin has created a giant network of friends. Darwin is very reputable, has placed
himself in the center of stuff. His initial reaction to the manuscript is that
he's been scooped, and that Wallace has the conclusion he's been looking for.

His friends write back to Darwin saying that it's okay for Darwin to work
together with him on the book. They publish a book together in 1858 or something
and it barely makes a splash.

Progressive vs Branching
--------------------------

People believe before Darwin and Wallace that there's mostly a linear hierarchy
with small branches. All about progression of species towards humans.

Darwin and Wallace argue that species don't just progress, they also regress.
They adapt to different situations, and adapt sometimes in ways that are
negative. Lots of branches are created for different species. There's no march
towards progression and complexity, just adaptations, both positive and
negative.
