Lecture 5
=============

The first review of the Origin of Species by Darwin said that
the work would be very controversial among theologians. He's not
dismissing the importance of the text, and believes that it deserves
attention.

It says that the work is going to be important everywhere: the Divinity Hall,
the College, the Lecture Room, and the Museum. It could also be saying that
the Origin of Species will have a lasting effect. It's a strong review for Darwin's
Origin of Species that also questions its impact.

Reception of Origin
------------------

Further solidified Darwin's reputation. Spread very quickly because it was popular.
Darwin had a friend, Thomas Henry Huxley, considered Darwin's Bull Dog for how he would
be sent after people who questioned it. Darwin publically stayed out of debates, leaving
Huxley to do it.

There's a famous debate between Huxley and the clergyman Wilberforce. At a meeting, paper was
being presented, and these two start yelling at eachother. Had nothing to do with the paper.
Lots of insults thrown at each other.

Catholics reluctantly begin to accept evolution.

Scientific Responses
---------------------

Fossil Record: Where were the varieties that Darwin claimed existed? Darwin believed the fossil
record is incomplete, maybe the fossils people are looking for no longer exist.

Fleming Jenkin objection: asks to imagine a fit trait coming up, say being tall. What happens if
that person mates with someone who's shorter? Presumably average height. Traits blend together as they
evolve and large variations are cancelled out, leaving unfit species. Mendel's work hasn't become popular
yet, so people don't really know about genetics or how it works.

One of the objections was answered very quickly. A fossil was found, the archeopetrix, that was somewhat
between bird and dinosaur. So here's the variety Darwin was looking for.

Haeckel View
Recapitulation Theory / Law of Parallelism
------------------------------------------

Embryonic production that can be observed mimicks the evolutionary history of the species.
We see a change from Fish to to Chicken to Pig to Human in terms of embryos, where
we go from a simple worm-like embryo to a more complex embryo that eventually
has the most complexity with the human embryo. Huxley believes in this, and says
it mimicks the natural history of the world.

Eclipse of Darwin
----------------------

Darwin's theory of natural selection falls out of favor, and is largely
discredited by the 1880s. Wallace is one of the remaining defenders,

A mechanism was discovered that could be married to Darwin's view, called
modern synthesis (memorize), that is more of what we think of Darwin's view
today.

Three Views on Darwin
------------------------

We've skipped over a lot in this story. Darwin publishes another book that
is not well-received at all. A lot leads up to Darwin's Origin that accumulates
and builds up leading to the work.

There are three ways historians might look at Darwin in retrospect.

Paradigmatic Scientist: Led to his theory by slow accumulation of evidence.

Anti-Christian: Had ulterior motives for developing his theory. 

Naturalism Capitalism: Darwin's view comes during the heyday of victorian capitalism.
He's a consequence of his time.

No really clear right or wrong answer.

Germ Theory and Disease
=========================

Infectious Disease in the 19th Century
---------------------------------------

Huge social problem. One of the dominant factors in child mortality and stopped life
from lasting nearly as long as it does today.

Particularly contagious diseases were terrible. Pneumonia, Turboculosis, Infectious
Diarrhea were killer. Today contagious diseases are barely on the radar, and they are
much more significant diseases.

There were few effective treatments, and no concensus over the mechanism. People were
unconvinced that medicine was the answer. Small pox from cows was the main thing being
studied, some vaccines were developed for cow pox that were also used for healing the disease
in people, but this was unlikely to be accessible to the general public.

Contagionism vs Miasma
------------------------

Two theories for how diseases work:
   Contagionism: Doseases spread when an "infectious principle" is passed between people.
   Empirical evidence was shakey in many cases.

   Miasma theory: Much older. Epidemics are caused by noxious air that is present in
   certain places or produced by rotting organic matter. Malaria = bad air. Used to
   explain certain diseases better than contagionism could.

It seems to be clear that contagionism won, but why would miasma theory be accepted?
Diseases such as cholera that are usually spread by people drinking infected water as
opposed to getting in contact with other, or diseases like malaria that spread via mosquito
bites didn't seem like they were passed by other people.

Science and Medicine
--------------------

Science and medicine are thought of as intimately connected today, but back then the
connection was more shakey. There's an idea that surgeons chop people up and couldn't
help to save people, medicines are still shakey.

Separate professions until the late 19th century. Changes in anatomy and classification
of disease did not often change medical practice.

Academic vs apprenticeship model: there's still a very strong divide between the
theoretical and practical sides of science. There's a traditional physician/surgeon/apothecary
division. There's no collaboration.

There's a loss of confidence in traditional medical theories. Theory of four humours
is now in crisis, undermined by discovery of blood circulation. This is the basis behind
bloodletting: bleed people out to relieve them of excess humours. People are still bloodletting,
however, even though it doesn't make theoretical sense anymore.

So it seems like medicine is in a state of crisis right now, but there's no new theory that
has risen up yet to replace the outdated theories, so things are stagnant.

The Microscope
-----------------

Definitely not invented in the 19th century. Comes from the 17th century, with Robert Hooke.

However, didn't influence medicine quite yet because the microscopes weren't powerful enough
to perceive germs and bacteria clearly. By the end of the 18th century, historians were
frustrated with the microscope, thought it was a toy for showing things at museums.

Joseph Jackson Lister (1786 - 1869)
-------------------------

Father of surgeon Joseph Lister.

Natural historian and optics expert who perfected the double lens design for the microscope,
minimizing distortion due to refraction. Costs go down significantly, advancing microbiology
significantly by making it available to much more people.

Louis Pasteur (1822 - 1895)
------------------------------

Not trained as a physician, was a chemist working on crystollogy who became interested
in the symmetry of molecules and how the symmetry of molecules in organic matter differed
from that of molecules in inorganic matter.

Fermentation was something where people didn't understand the mechanisms behind it.
Pasteur researched the problems confusing people about it. He became convinced that
yeast was an organic sort of thing that was necessary for fermentation to happen,
and that there were bacteria and other things getting mixed in that were screwing up the
process.

Spontaneous Generation
-------------------------

After several years of study, became involved in this highly controversial debate.
Spontaneous generation says that organic matter can be generated from inorganic matter.

Pasteur was convinced about biogenesis, the idea that living organisms can only come
from other living organisms. Applied this to putrefacation and disease, saying that diseases
come from other living things.

Debates with naturalist Felix Pouchet began in 1858. Pasteur belived Pouchet's experiments
showed contamination from dust, not spontaneous generation.

Philosophical/religious aspects of the controversy:
  --biogenesis makes microscopic realm the same thing as larger animals, everything's designed
  by God.

Germ Theory Wins Out
-----------------------

Pasteur comes up with swan-necked flask experiment where the sample would stay fine
in the flask, but if you broke the neck off then the sample would quickly become contaminated.

Quickly applied. In 1864, Pasteur and collaborators devised pasteurization of wine.

In 1868, Pasteur was elected to French Academy of Sciences and suffered a stroke which prevented
him from carrying out experiments himself, due to losing the ability to control his left arm.
His practical experiments had to be done in collaboration with assistants.

Joseph Lister (1827 - 1912)
---------------

Physician who popularized antiseptic technique in surgery.
Convinced of germ theory by Pasteur's work. Believed wound infections
could be prevented by applying an agent that killed "septic organisms".

Division of wounds into three types: incisions, contusions or lacerations, and abscesses.
The doctor's role in each group is to prevent the occurrence of decomposition. Not
creating incisions yet, just trying to let the body naturally repair itself without getting
infected.

No need yet to know what types of microorganisms are around, just trying to kill all of them
at any cost. Using antiseptics that can cause burn wounds.

Pasteur and Vaccines
----------------------

Performed "attentuation" experiments with chicken cholera in 1879 to produce vaccine. Trying
to prevent chickens from getting killed.

Turned attention to anthrax and cholera, due to their high agricultural and medical importance.
Cholera was just terrifying, caused many terrible epidemics. Anthrax killed sheep and cows,
which could destroy farms.

Attenuated; weakened, alive bacteria and virus.
Killed: the bacteria is dead, no longer able to spread.

1881 trial of anthrax vaccine in 50 sheep was large public success.

Debate about whether or not Pasteur used an attenuated or a killed vaccine. Believe he used
a killed vaccine these days by examining his notebooks, but didn't want to admit that due
to publically debating that attenuated vaccines were better.

Pasteur had a public rivalry with Robert Koch, a German physician who identified the bacterium
that caused anthrax in 1876.

Robert Koch (1843 - 1910)
----------------------------

Very good at scientific networking and technical tinkering.
Had a national rivalry with Pasteur.

Took photographs of anthrax bacilli in 1876. Dark rods and chains that were laying dormant in pastures.
The photograph microscope was extremely influential, since a bad photograph was much better than
a misleading or inaccurate drawing. Gave an objectivity to observations of molecules.

Realized that you could see bacteria better under different stains besides waters. Used dyes that were very
bright and stable, and stained things at different strengths, allowing you to distinguish different
types of cells and bacteria.

Koch's Postulates (don't have to memorize)
---------------------

1. Microbe must be present in all cases of disease and absent in healthy individuals
2. Microbe must be grown in lab in pure culture after being isolated from diseased organism
3. When introduced into healthy organism's body, microbe should cause disease
4. When isolated again from newly diseased organism, microbe should be found to be identical
in form to the originals.

By the early 1890s, however, Koch himself is noting that there are many anomalies that don't
agree with these rules. Viruses particularly don't behave, since they aren't perceivable yet
with the technology available at the time.

A lot of stories argue that the postulates were good for bacterial diseases but hindered
viral research for quite some time.

Rabies
--------------

Rabies would not follow the postulates since it was a virus. Could not be seen under the
microscope.
First human use of vaccine for rabies was in 1885 by Pasteur and collaborators.

Vaccine was a series of injections of increasingly less "attenuated" infectious material.
No pure culture was performed. The idea was that this would weaken the infectious agent
over time until eventually it died.

The social impact of rabies was great because although it wasn't very common, it killed everyone
who developed advanced symptoms, frightening people. Animals would go mad and bite people.

The Pasteur Boom
-------------------

A media event with Pasteur curing several boys sent to France who had been bitten by a dog with
rabies. Lots of public exposure to the idea of medicine collaborating with science saving people.
Idea of collaboration stays in America until modern times.

The Rise of Laboratory Medicine
---------------------------------

Popular excitement in Europe and North America over cures that could be discovered
in the lab. Lots of medical research institutes open, lots of funding for
other research efforts and public health initiatives. The picture of medicine
by the end of the 19th century is completely different from the picture in 1850.

In summary, the theoretical developments in microbiology and medicine were
made possible by technological innovations.

SUMMARY
================

Tech drives science in the case of the microscope. The better the microscope gets, the
more science is developed and theories are changed.

Social interest drives experimentation. Acceptance of medicine as science, public interest
grows due to the highly public rabies cure experiments.

Pasteur refutes spontaneous generation using swan-necked flask.