HPS211 Lecture 1
=================

Syllabus
=================
Instructor: Greg Lusk (greg.lusk@toronto.ca)
TA: Alison Berzins (alison.berzins@mail.utoronto.ca)

Overview: overview of history of science from (roughly) 1800 to (roughly) the
present.
NEED TO USE U OF T EMAIL OR MESSAGES WILL BE IGNORED ;_;

Lecture
Introduction
=================

What is History?
-------------------

What do historians do? What is the point of this course?
Is history just a synthesis of various viewpoints and various stories that are
passed down over time, or is it something more? Is history a matter of
perspective or is it more objective?

The fact that history is so controlled by historians means that history is
controlled very strongly by different perspectives. There is still objectivity
to history, but we need to be careful and look out for biases that determine the
history we receive(eurocentrism, for example).

We also need to realize that there are some things that affect how objective
history can be. For example, if you're trying to determine the day a war
started, do you say it happened the day bombs were dropped or do you say it
happened the day the bombed country declared war?

So history is a series of facts that are built up and delivered through
interpretation.

What is Philosophy?
--------------------

Discussion ensues about what philosophy is. The main reason we should know this
is because up until the point that the class covers, there was no real
distinction between science and philosphy. In this class, we begin to establish
the difference.

Why history and philosophy of science?
-------------------------------------

Seriously, why are they stuck together in the same subject?  Because biases.
Because individual recounts of history. Because of subjectivity.

This subject merges them together and tries to dissuade people studying it of
their biases.

Longitude
==============

You can determine your latitude fairly easily if you're stranded on a desert
island using the sun's height. But how do you figure out your longitude? If you
have a watch set to your old timezone, you can test with it to figure out your
longitude range via timezone.

HMS Association
-------------------

The lieutenant who tracked the longitude on the HMS Association in October 1707
was hung immediately for saying that they were closer to land than the captain
thought they were. The HMS Association ran smack into land the next morning,
along with four other ships.

Navigating The Globe
--------------------

Back in the 1700s, navigation was very difficult. North and south (latitude was
easy) by measuring the angle from the sun, e.g. using Champlain's Astrolabe)

People knew time was related to longitude, they could use heavenly observations
to determine the time, and time was approximately equal to distance due to
timezones.

But longitude was difficult to calculate at sea. Telescopes were too large to be
accurate and powerful, boats moved making it difficult to observe, and time
keepers were even more inaccurate at sea (lubricates and metals act differently
in different temperatures, pendulums move differently when shaken)

Dead Reckoning
----------------

Primitive way of determining location. One way of examining longitude was
determinining latitude and sailing until hitting a longitude. But for seafarers
this was problematic, since it drastically prolonged the journey (increases
chance of scurvey, pirates, mutiny).

So instead the Dead Reckoning was used to figure out how much speed the boat was
travelling at. Drop rope in water with hourglass, see how much rope is being
extended. But since wind, current, and cumulative small errors cause large
errors when taken in sum, was not very effective.

Longitude Prize
----------------------

Established in 1714 through an act of British Parliament.
Big chunks of money given to individuals who could determine longitude within a
certain amount of accuracy. Just obscene amounts, 2.45 million pounds (today)
given to individual who could determine longitude within 30 nautical miles (56
km).

Previous Suggestions
----------------------

Celatone (Galileo)
  -- use satellites of Jupiter as time keeping device
  -- can't see them during the day, hard to measure on a moving ship
  -- method gained acceptance on land circa 1650
  -- it's a mask that someone on the ship can wear while laying down and keeping
  steady, has a telescope in one eye and a focusing point in the other.

Powder of Sympathy (1687, Sir Kenelm Digby)
Cut up a bunch of dogs, keep them alive, use powder which apparently only acts
at a distance and is not painless. The dog, when you heal it, feels pain, and
screams/barks at exactly 12 o'clock. You know the time now. Problem solved.

Magnetic Variation Method (potential blog post?)
Magnetic north and true north are different. If you calculate the difference
between them, you can use this to get your longitude. Varies too much to
work well.

Cannon Signals (1714ish)
You use cannons to signal from London at times, and use a relay of ships to
communicate times. But you need a bunch of sailors, and a bunch of ships just
sitting around for months on end.

Two Main Competitors
---------------------

The Lunar Distance Method
  Calculate distance from the moon and other stars to figure out relative
  position.

Clocks (John Harrison)
Made clocks somehow. Only clock maker in Paris before he was 20 years old. Made
a clock in a tower out of wood. Cheap, easier to work with but mainly it was not
susceptible to heat like other clocks at the time were. Solved the problems with
earlier lubricants and metals used for pendulums and other time-keeping devices.

Met up with Graham from the Royal Society, convinced him that he knew what he
was doing via plans and discussion, and got funding. Made his first clock four
years later.

Took his clock to Portugal to show that it could work for measuring longitude,
had less than eight minutes of inaccuracy. Got more funding, and came back with
a second prototype. Had much more brass, still some wood on the inside. 

Octant/Sextant
--------------------

Invented simulataneously by John Hadley and Thomas Godfrey. Ready long before
John Harrison's clocks.

Main important thing was in had mirrors. Could keep two objects in the sight at
once, and their distances relative to each other remained stable even if a ship
was moving. No need to look at the horizon to set the device and look at the sky
to set it again, so less room for error. Mark in the mirrors allowed you to see
one point and keep it about level.

What Happened?
------------------

Prize was never awarded by the longitude board. Increasingly strict rules were
put in place by acts of Parliament to make the prize more difficult to obtain.
Harrison hacked on his H3 prototype, took him 19 years of very hard work. Took
his assistant Jeffreys with him travelling, and they made a prototype that fit
in the hand and was much less expensive. Harrison had to appeal to the King, and
then Parliament, to receive the money from the prize.

The Lunar Distance Method dominated through 1800. This was because it was
cheaper.

Why tell this story?
-----------------------

Sets the stage for what life is like at this point. Can't tell where we are on
the globe when sailing across the ocean.

People are moving around the world. Colonialism is dominating.

And because history is repeating with the Longitude Prize 2014.
