Lecture 10
10.1: Lavoisier
==================

At this point Newton has destroyed the idea that the sublunary realm behaves
differently from the moon and beyond. We have a unified model of how
motion/physics works.

However, we still have a classical model of how matter works -- four elements
compose everything. Similar to the physics models, we have a lot of different
conflicting views of what composes everything in the world. Some people maintain
that everything is made of sulfur and mercury, others say salt, etc.
Lavoisier puts an end to this. He makes a table of 33 elements, but he treats
them differently than other people have been. They're defined pragmatically as
anything that doesn't have an experiment to be broken into multiple parts. Note
the emphasis on experimentation as the basis.

Antoine was born in 1733. He's part of the middle-class, so not a peasant but
not a nobleman either. Privleges are restricted for him: can't carry a sword,
can't take on some jobs. With enough money, you can bridge this gap by buying a
title, which he eventually does. Ended up getting him killed in the French
Revolution.

Married to Marie-Anne Lavoisier, formerly the poet Marie-Anne Balzac. They were
a team in the laboratory, with her taking care of the practical experiments. So
when you hear of Lavoisier's accomplishments, think of the family.

The Problem With Phlogiston
--------------------------

Phlogiston theory for how burning works: when you burn stuff, fire is stuff
coming off of the material. Phlogiston is a material that comes out of things
when they burn, causing combustion. Explains some things such as objects getting
lighter in color and since air apparently absorbs phlogiston it explains why a
candle goes out in a sealed vessel.

However, runs into some problems, notably with burning metals. The results from
burning phosphorous weigh more than the original, which shouldn't happen if
something is coming off. The response was to suggest that phlogiston has
negative weight in some situations, buoying the weight of the object.

Lavoisier finds this ridiculous, especially because it runs contrary to...

The French Style of Chemistry
-------------------------

Everything must be done and reasoned using empirical observations. Symbolized by
the French making the best balances seen yet, with very precise measurements.

The English are being very private at the moment, which France tries to upset by
working very much in teams out of national interest. They need to progress to
put France ahead of other countries and cultures. This is particularly important
with things such as gunpowder, where France is severely lagging behind.

The Metric System (1795)
------------------------

At this point, we have 5 units: meter, are, stere, litre, gramme. There is no
relationship between these units, they just represent many different things.
France attempts to fix this and make this make more sense, again out of national
interest.

So Lavoisier is irritated at the idea of Phlogiston since it goes against the
metric system.

Joseph Priestly
---------------

Has dinner with Lavoisier one night in 1774, told Lavoisier about an experiment where a
candle supported combustion better than regular air. This is a big deal, because
it shines doubt on the idea that air is one of the four elements. It starts to
become clear that air is a compound. 1775 the revolution occurs, and France and
America begin fighting, which means that Lavoisier and Priestly are unable to
collaborate.

Unfortunately Priestly lets his information slip.

Joseph Priestly Background (1733 - 1804)
---------------------------------

Made his living as a minister but he's actually a dissenter. Wrote a lot of
political and theological books with deeply heretical views, didn't make him
popular.

Got interested in the chemistry of gases. It was understood that the
fermentation of anything produced gas, which bothered Priestly, his wife and
kids. This inspired him to do experiments, such as setting fire to wood chips
and putting them in beer to discover that it did not allow for combustion. His
experiments were cut short eventually, but not before he made some advances in
pneumatic chemistry.

Felt bad about sacrificing mice, so he developed an experiment for testing the
"goodness" of air. Followed Boyle's experiments for creating nitric acid, and
leads him to try and find situations that can cause mice to survive in a jar
with a candle. Found that if you stick a plant into the jar, it can refresh the
air in the jar, and that a candle can sustain in a jar with a plant, and so can
a mice. Leads to realization that plants emit what we breathe in.

This isn't quite his crucial combination, although it's quite good.
He takes calx of mercury, putting it into a container, connected to a pneumatic
trough with metallic mercury (to avoid absorbing some of the gases). Uses a
burning lens to burn the calx of mercury, and a gas is created, and the gas is
pure oxygen. Gives a decomposition of oxide, and a reduction with charcoal.

He was worried that since oxygen seems better than natural air, and better than
we deserve from nature, and that it might cause us to die more quickly. 

10.2: Chemistry

Helmont's Willow Tree
--------------------

You take a tree, dump it in a kiln and weigh it, bury it in dirt for five years,
take care of it, weigh it again afterwards and you'll notice that the tree has
lost. Seems to imply that the tree is gaining weight from the water. Helmont did
this. Weight doesn't come from the soil, deeply convincing argument that water
is fundamental and earth is composite.

Lavoisier gives us a clearer picture of what's going on here. He's pushing for a
full-scale revolution of the way that science works, the Scientific Revolution.

Wrestling with the fact that some materials gain weight when you burn them.
Thesis he's working on is that metals gain weight because they take air into
themselves, gain weight by taking air in. Starts by replicating Priestly's
experiments and taking them a step further.

The 12 Day Experiment 
----------------------

Lit a flame under a pot filled with mercury, left it running for 12 continuous
days. After the first day nothing exciting happened, but after the second day
small red flecks begin to appear. After 12 days, as many red flecks as could
form are formed and the heat is shut off. The mercury calks that were formed
were collected and subjected to further experimentation, trying to reverse the
process and finding that it produces the exact amount of air as was consumed
initially.

He used this to conclude that the air of the atmosphere is not a simple
substance/element, but instead a composition of respirable air and noxious gas.
He gave this substance the name OXYGEN.

oxy: meaning acid
gen: meaning maker

He belives that oxygen is the root of all acids, and that all salts are a
combination of oxygen and some base. This is not true, it's the hydrogen that
determines the acid.

Caloric Theory
-------------

Lavoisier's theory for how flame works. Believes that there's an equivalent
anti-substance to fire called Caloric that explains a few interactions. Entirely
wrong, but looks similar to the modern kinetic theory of heat which allows
people to make advances anyways.

Stop seeing the world in terms of elements. Divided into four categories: gases,
metal, non-metals, and one other.

Three Steps To Chemical Revolution
----------------------------------

1. Priestly produces pure oxygen, calls it dephlogisticated air
2. Lavoisier identifies this substance as oxygen
3. Lavoisier and friends build new chemical nomenclature around oxygen theory of
combustion

Reform of Chemical Nomenclature
------------------------------

Giving things new names doesn't make a huge difference, except when you consider
the social dimension of what's going on. Using the oxygen theory and new
results, by pushing for this new nomenclature, it gets everybody on the same
page for how to name things. Able to do this using the prestige of the French
scientific society. This gets everybody talking the same language, something
that is very new. This causes knowledge to spread faster.

The Prediction of Silicon
-------------------------

People begin to experiment with making theories and trying experiments to
confirm them. Starts off the way to think.

They didn't just make names, they engaged in a social campaign to convince
people that this was a scientific revolution to get them on the same page.
