Lecture 4
Alexandria (Continued)
==================

Galen (120 - 200 CE)
---------------

Probably the most important doctor in history.
Greeks and Romans had wildly different views on education: Greece thought that
education and the pursuit of knowledge was the most important thing ever,
whereas in the Roman empire it existed as a leftover kept for learning, and was
more a sign of being from higher society.

10% of all surviving Greek medical texts were by Galen. He connected medicine
with anatomy much more deeply than anyone had ever before. Cutting people up to
learn was taboo, but Galen worked for the gladiators as a doctor so he would see
people's internals. The story goes that doctors were also allowed to do
vivisections on dead bodies due to Egyptian burial ceremonies, allowing people
to advance anatomy. Galen produced a standard medical corpus about people's
anatomy that was used for a very long time (up until 1500).

The big revolution in the 1500s is when people begin questioning Galen.

Classical Indian Astronomy
===========================

From the Brihaspati Carvaka School, somewhere between 200 BCE and 200 CE, we see
a current running through philosophy that shows a shockingly modern atheist and
materialistic view on death where there is no afterlife and we all become dust
eventually.

Nalanda University (5th to 11th century CE)
-------------------

10000 students, 2000 teachers, all of whom would have lived in the university.
Entirely state sponsored, so approximately 200 villages where the agricultural
output would be dedicated completely to feeding people in the university. Very
expensive.

Very cosmopolitan: you didn't get just a dogmatic religious education, you would
be taught other schools of religion, medicine, and different fields of science.
It's national and covers many schools of thought. Venus Tablet was taught here
as history of science.

Greeks inherited thing about perfect circles, obsessed with it, but when
Ptolemy's work comes to India it gets developed without the perfect circles
obsession. Gets taken much further, calculations are developed to make things
work out.

We can see that India is getting many influences and is sending them back.

Aryabhata (476 - 550 CE)
-----------------------

Made many significant contributions to Indian astronomy, considered the most
influential mathematician/astronomer from India.
Suggested it's not the stars that go around, it's the Earth. He still thinks
that the Earth is in the center, but the stars sit still while the Earth
rotates. So note that in 500 CE we have the idea that the Earth is moving, which
is really weird and raised a lot of arguments.

He's not just thinking this stuff up -- he is also using this idea as a base to
build up a mathematical model of the solar system.

Credited with the idea of relativity of motion.
Surmised that things are lit up by the sun.
Measured angles of shadows at different positions to come up with an even better
estimate of the size of the Earth.

Also credited with getting the value of pi much closer than anyone had gotten it
before.

This brings up an interesting relation between Greek, Indian and Chinese math.
Greek math is based very much on whole numbers, geometry and ratios between
whole numbers. This made calculating the exact value of pi difficult.
Indian culture had no such presumption, so they pursued much more closely
questions such as pi.

Indian Numerals
-----------------

Before Aryabhata, some groups of people developed the modern base 10 numerical
system. Made long division much more straightforward, along with other
calculations, allowing for a lot of mathematical advancement.

Before this, they didn't have 0 and numbers below 1. Parmenidis said that
"nothing" could not exist, meaning that the number zero could not exist from
first principles.

The place system including decimals was developed here as well.

Brahmagupta (597 - 668 CE)
------

Came up with the rules for treating zero as a number and the rules by which it
should behave. Before there were placeholders for zero, but not actually the
number zero -- it couldn't be treated as a number.

Trig and Astronomy
------------------

Aryahbata developed the sine function. While there was the basic setup of
trigonometry in previous cultures, it crystallized in India. Copernicus had
trigonometry because of India, which Ptolemy didn't have.

Islamic Science
=================

622 is the beginning of the Islamic calendar. Mohammad moved his followers to
middle India.

From 622 - 750 CE, Islam went from non-existence to controlling a lot of land.
Everyone in the land was not necessarily Islamic, it allowed different cultures
and societies to get brought into dialogues in the Islamic world. We see a
similar pattern to the Archaemenid empire where land is not crushed and
subjegated, instead it allows for people to talk and get exposure to different
societies. They made a very large effort to bring people into discussion with
them because it was part of their cultural goals (every Muslim needs to know the
Quran).

ibn Hayyan ( 721 - 815)
--------------------

aka: Gerber

Considered one of the fathers of modern chemistry. Advocates that people need to
perform practical experiments and get actual results before they make claims
about chemical properties. You can see that this clashes with the traditional
story, which claims that it was several hundred years later that people began to
realize they need to make observations and note things.

Gets his hands dirty with things that would normally be delegated to the lower
classes, including alchemy with metals and materials such as sulfur. Pursued the
idea that everything can be transmuted from gold through enough steps. There was
also a theory that sulfur and mercury made up everything, because of their
occurence in a lot of mines in the area.

He discovered another means of dissolving gold using nitric acid and
hydrochloric acid, called aqua regia. He discovered that you could expand the
gold supply, which made alchemy begin to disrupt the economy.

Alhazen (965 - 1040)
------------------

Advocates that you need to attack opinions from every side possible in order to
find the truth, and also that one must doubt their own opinion. He undermines
the idea that science as critical thinking was a Reneissance thing.

He made a lot of contributions to many fields, we emphasize optics.

At the time, four optical theories that are wrong:
  Intromission (going in)
    -- Aristotelian: transparent medium of vision altered by external objects.
    stuff between you and the world is altered by objects and goes into your
    eyes. no math or calculations provided.
    -- Epicurean: a thin layer of the thing seen peels off and hits the eye.

  Extromission (going out)
    -- Euclidean: eyes emenate a visual cone, which reaches out and touches
    stuff. Euclid focuses on geometry, he focuses on a geometrical, mathematical
    and precise approach.

    -- Galenic: a visual fire comes out of the eye, a subtle spirit that shoots
    out of your eyes and sees stuff.

  People didn't buy the extromission theories since people knew that stuff was
  going through the eyes through observations.

Alhazen's synthesis takes what's good about all four theories and brings them
together. It's an intromission theory where the Euclidean idea with the cone is
being used, except going into your eye. Every point has light going in every
direction, which goes into your eye through a cone. An explosion of light from
every object can be reconstructed by your eye into a picture.

He justifies this using mirrors of various sizes and shapes to figure out what's
going on, doubting and testing things.

Didn't get it completely right: thought the idea of the image being upside-down
wasn't acceptable, so he thought the vision happened at the front of the eye
ball as opposed to the back.

Note that he is applying math to the sublunarary realm -- we're breaking off of
the Aristolian idea that math can only be applied beyond the moon. He rejects
Parmenidis.

The Translation Movement
-----------------------

Before Gerber and Alhazen, we have the translation movement starting up, which
persists for several centuries. Spread of culture that aims to achieve as much
knowledge as possible and translate it into Arabic. 

Helped along by several technologies, including papermakers from China, improved
Arabic script motivated by getting the Quran completely accurate, vast tracts of
land that they control and tons of money to fund this with (making scholars
rich), astronomy and alchemy, geometry, a lot of philosophy and logic, medicine,
and other forms of writing.

They start with medical texts, then leads to translating everything.

This is the culmination of everything we have discussed.

Baghdad's House of Wisdom
----------------------

Around the same time, acts as an example of a network of state-sponsored schools
with emphasis on not only religion but also maths and sciences.

We can see this massive state-sponsored push to bring all knowledge into the
Islamic world and translate it into Arabic and move forward with it via
scholars.

Falsafah & Kalam
---------------

Falsafah was a tradtion of philosophers primarily influenced by the Paripatetics
(Aristotle and friends).

DON'T MEMORIZE THESE PEOPLE.
Composed of al-Kindi(translation movement, first arabic
philospher, public defender of other traditions being valuable. Had to drop
important ideas of Aristotle, such as the world being eternal),
al-Farabi(integrating Aristotle's view of the divine rational being (prime
mover) into religion as God, celestial spheres are emanations of God's mind that
cascade down in different forms. Children of giraffes look like giraffes because
they are influenced by the mind of god), Avicenna(synthesis of Plato, Aristotle
and some medicine), Averroes(started an influential movement of making contact
between Aristolian ideas and later cultures). 

Then we have an opposing tradition, Kalam, primarily about theology and largely
influenced by the Quaran and Hadith. Included al-Ghazali, who was an important
figure due to his focus on attacking the Aristotle world view through
rationality. He points out that the idea of things behaving based on what we
imagine their properties are doesn't make sense, since you can imagine lots of
different behaviors that aren't true. Destroys the Formal notion of motion. He
uses this to bridge things towards the idea of God, saying that the laws of the
world are governed by demigods. Creates a picture of occasionalism, which says
that all the regularities in the world are govered by the habits of gods, e.g.
gravity is governed by a god feeling like things should go down. The
associations of atoms are what are being governed.

He opens up a new worldview where everything is contingent and everything could
be different, which means that we need to mess with things and experiment with
them to figure out what the world is like at any different moment.

Note that people thought the Kalam religion was sketchy even though it's opposed
to Falsafah, a tradition based on foreign religions.

Hypothesis about how science was developed before the scientific method was
formally established:
  - before method, we have contextual values that are biased and which
    threaten to disrupt proper science. How does science stay stable? Through
    people having discussions where they can set aside their cultural values. 
