Lecture 8
===============

Descartes and Bacon
-------------------

Convinced that science hasn't been going in the right track, too focused on
philosophy and that the game needs to be stepped up.

Descartes emphasizes clear reasoning, Bacon emphasizes data and knowledge. Both
overlap but have different focuses on things.

Attempt to find a new scientific method.

A Question of Method
--------------------

The scientific method is not something that's ever finished, it's always being
adapted based on the state of the field.

Francis Bacon (1561 - 1626)
---------------------

His name is often associated with the scientific method itself (especially in
England). Became the patron saint of English society.

The way you can tell good methods from bad is good methods produce results that
increase the amount of knowledge we have. This is cutting away the divide
between the theoretical and practical study of science. We need to get more
practical with our investigations.

He's the right kind of guy for this, because he's rich and has a lot of
political influence. Has a lot more influence than someone at the bottom of
society. He's a religious guy who formulates his acts in terms of his Christian
Duty to relieve the suffering of humankind.

Novum Organum (1620)
-------------------

Written by Francis Bacon. Puts in place a new system for performing science and
doing logic and argumentation. Shows a ship of knowledge leaving the confines of
the Mediterranean towards the great unknown Atlantic.

Points out how unhelpful Syllogistic Logic is. Wants to produce new ways of
thinking. In Syllogistic Logic you would take a natural law and use it to infer
how particular objects should behave; Bacon believes this is backwards, we
should go from the way objects behave to maybe establishing a natural law once
we have enough evidence.

His main tool for doing this is Induction, where you build up a case bit by bit
by establishing middle axioms (restricted axioms with as little theory as
possible), use that to create new questions, and then continue making new
observations and new middle axioms until you can establish higher axioms, and
eventually arrive at the truth.

The main way for determining observations is through instruments, not the naked
hand or pure reasoning.

Idols of the Tribe
------------------

There are several biases built into human nature, e.g. cognitive biases, like
confirmation bias or self-serving bias. All of us fall victim to this. Bacon
doesn't have the big picture that we have today, but he knows that we have these
biases and calls them idols of the tribe.

Idols of the Cave
------------------

Biases peculiar to an individual due to education or temperment, see evidence of
it everywhere. 

Idols of the Marketplace
----------------------

Biases due to the medium of communication. Translation issues, failure to
express, certain kinds of expressions that trap you into a certain way of
thinking e.g. four elements being used to express everything.

Idols of the Theatre
-------------------

Biases due to being locked into a systematic belief that everyone else has, e.g.
the view of the solar system. Hard to break out after a certain point.

Rene Descartes (1596 - 1650 CE)
------------------------------

Also wants to wipe the slate clean and start fresh. Most of his physics are
underwhelming but his math is great.

The Mechanical Philosophy
-------------------------

Descartes believes that everything should be explained in terms of mechanical
action, no forms or active principles. There is just matter and human souls. He
separates the human souls from matter and treats it differently, but says
everything else is strictly mechanical.

He also believes that people are made entirely of mechanisms (nerves) that are
triggered by animal spirits (also matter) and cause the body to move around.

NOTE: Read Schaven (??) note from the portal, will influence the exam. He says
that clocks appeal to early European philosopher because it acts as a good
metaphor for how people and things should behave.

The Clock Metaphor
-------------------

Descartes also believes that we should think like a clock, in the sense that we
should reduce involved propositions step by step (tick tock) until we build up
to absolute knowledge.

Scientist as Sage
------------------

Descartes says we need to start off with the smallest bit of knowledge and build
up until you have absolute.

Bacon vs. Descartes
-------------------

Bacon is empiracist, Descartes is a rationalist. Bacon says we need to do
experiments, Descartes says we can use our reasoning. Both still manage to
liberate us from the idea that we have to come up with world-spanning theories,
we can instead just build up bit by bit.

8.2 Natural History
(and some other stuff)
===================

The Voyages of Discovery (1497)
------------------------

Africa is a place where people don't like you around this time. Vasco Da Gama
found a way to navigate around it. This is the advent of colonialism. Indian
ocean is a lively trading place for many different cultures at this point.

Natural History Museums
----------------------

With natural trade, people began to take natural things and display them in
museums, in displays to show off how learned and cultured they were.

These displays were intended much more for entertainment than education. So
things from other cultures are being brought into Europe, bringing a huge amount
of natural knowledge into Europe.

Relocating Modern Science (1725)
-------------------------

Chapter 1 of this tells the story of another book, The Jardin de Lorixa by
Nicolas L'Empereur, A guy from Europe settled down in India and collected and
correlated all the herbal knowledge around in this book. This is really useful
for keeping sailors alive, until at least as late as the 18th century. Tons of
people dying on sea voyages, need remedies.

Also aims to get rid of lies being perpetuated by the Dutch about remedies to
protect trade secrets.

Huge amounts of natural knowledge are pouring into Europe from different parts
of the world.

Yuktibhasa (1550)
------------------

By Jyesthadeva. Another piece of knowledge brought into Europe around the age of
colonialism as a product of discussion. A textbook summary of the results of the
Kerala school of mathematics. Includes results important to Calculus (finding
the slope of a tangent to a curve), as well as iterative techniques to
numerically solve non-linear equations.

Also shows something that is conceptually very similar to Tycho Brahe's
astronomical system.

An epic work that summarizes the best of the work of the Karala school. Notably
written in the local language as opposed to Sanskrit, and includes proofs and
explanations and arguments, not something previously included in texts by this
school. Peculiar, but possibly explained by the fact that the Portugese made
contact in India 50 years earlier.

The Society of Jesus (Jesuits) est. 1540
---------------------------------------

Maybe the Yuktibhasa was written for this society, which made contact with the
School of Karala. Setting up a system for education, their job is to remain
super-educated, so they set up schools to educate the young and priests. Doing
the heavy lifting of getting people up to speed and raising the modern level of
education while raising the level of communication inside of Europe.

Matteo Ricci (1552 - 1610)
-------------------------

Arrives in China in the 1580s looking to spread the good word, bringing along a
head full of math and astronomy that makes him feel welcome. Very fortunate,
because he arrives in China at the right time when their calendar is beginning
to slip by about ten days. Standards are rising while instruments have gone
away. They need to make sure that the skies are behaving regularly, but if the
calendar is slipping off then the predictions are going to be crazy.

Around 600 CE< the astro-Calendric bureau employed Indian astronomers. Around
1250, created a special department for Muslim astronomers.

Very selective about the things they want to learn. Super interested in Math and
Astronomy but not really Theology.

Government called for a reform of the calendar, dropping the Jesuits into
things. Translating a lot of texts into Chinese.

More Jesuits start appearing in the 1600s, some people begin to oppose their
presence. Some Chinese scholars claim that the new learning being introduced
from Europe is just old Chinese knowledge being refound and repurposed.
Interesting parallels with European culture later on claiming that other
cultures' developments were just European knowledge being reclaimed.
