HPS210 Lecture 1 
=================

Info Stuff
-----------------
Instructor: Cory Lewis
Email: hps210h1@utoronto.ca
Syllabus: http://bit.ly/1olWCNw
Book: The Dialogue of Civilizations In The Birth of Modern Science
      				by Arun Bala

Tests will be multiple choice. Apparently entirely multiple choice?

For the assignment:
    1. Focus on choosing an article on a subject with lots of references to
    consult. Do preliminary research to figure out that you have stuff available
    to consult.
    2. Cite pretty much every sentence, or almost every sentence. Go beyond
    what's available in public available resources and dive into the library.
    Sources are what he's looking for here.
    3. Concise, informative, and interesting. Stay away from too much jargon,
    and make sure that it is clear and readable.
    4. Use one of the citation systems (APA, MLA, ...) but it doesn't have to be
    a particular one.

Lecture
================

Course Overview
---------------
This course covers the history of science from the very beginning
to the 1800s.

This course used to teach that scientific advancement followed a
quadratic curve, where the majority of scientific advancement occurred
during modern science (when science was primarily Eurocentric). This was
the story as the teacher was originally taught it, and is one that is repeated
due to historians shying away from telling large grand narratives that would
emphasize the contributions of Europe towards modern science. Instead, they
focus on telling microhistories, which don't help to build a big
picture of what happened.

The focus of the lectures will be preparing you to read the course textbook,
which is designed as a counterargument to the Eurocentric telling of scientific
history.

These notes will be based off of what the teacher expresses. Since the teacher
is expressing his own viewpoint, do not take it entirely for granted. Question
and verify things that you read here.

The History Of Science (in reverse)
-----------------------------------

1800 CE
----------

The big deal was Volta dveloping the electric pile, a stack of copper and nickel
separated by copper, the world's first battery. Controlled electricity shaped
everything that happened afterwards.

At the same time, chemistry was made quantative rather than qualitative by
Lavoisier, making chemistry into a science where careful measurements were taken
and laws were formed, such as the Law of Conservation. Chemistry also gained
standardized units of measurement. These contributions earned Antoine Lavoisier
the title of The Father of Modern Chemistry. 

Alchemy was the popular older form of chemistry, and a very private form of
science where secrets would be passed between members of a family. This held
back science, as often conclusions would be subjective and unverified.

1697 CE
-----------

Isaac Newton is more well known for his contributions to physics, but was also
an alchemist. He was an important member of the Royal Society, a gathering of
scientists who would exchange information. This shift in mentality towards
science helped to get the ball rolling on scientific advancement, leading up to
the Scientific Revolution.

1632 CE
-----------

The Medici Family were a family who donated large amounts of money towards the
advancement of arts and science. In particular, they donated money to Galileo,
who started as a university professor and found his way into the prince's court.
Here, he was regarded as a philosophical rockstar, entertaining families like
the Medicis with his science. He invented the telescope, which enabled observing
stars, and led him to discover that things were resolving around Jupiter,
eventually leading to the discovery that the Earth revolves around the Sun(by
way of disproving that the Earth was not the only source of rotation in the
solar system).

1618 CE
------------

Johannes Kepler rose to fame by way of being clever from a nobody to an
imperial mathematician. His big innovation was discovering that things don't go
in perfect cycles around the Earth, but instead resolve in ellipses.

1543 CE
------------

Copernicus is the centerpoint of a lot of discussions about scientific
revolutions. He didn't want to be the cause of revolution but in order to make
his math work, he needed to make the Sun the center of the solar system. He
started focusing math on analyzing the solar system, whereas previously math had
not been used to analyze in such a large scale.

The author of the class book spends a lot of time discussing the developments of
all the math that Copernicus relied on in his calculations.

1224 CE / 970 CE
-----------

The European university system was largely inspired by the university system of
the Islamic world, inspired by one important scientist(?) who was largely
influenced by their advancements. This can be seen in the universities that were
developed around 1224 CE(Europe) and 970 CE(Islam).

However, when Europe got access to the research developed in the Islamic world
during the Christian crusades, they would repaint the story to make it seem like
ancient Greece was the source when they were actually building off of the
Islamic world, since Islam was the political rival of Europe.

965 - 1040 CE
---------------

Alhazen realized how vision works. Prior to his research, the world was
convinced that beams of stuff were shot out of the eye and whatever it hit was
visible. He applied geometry to vision and realized that things were backwards,
and that light was reflected into the eye to make it visible.

722 - 804 CE
---------------

The polymath Geber invented crystalization, a method of separating and purifying
materials. He was also a big advocate of the experimental method, which
emphasized constantly experimenting and verifying before saying anything about
how science works. This has earned him the title of The Father of Modern
Chemistry (800 years earlier and distinctly non-European).

400 - 1190 CE
-----------------

Significant developments in math take place at Nalanda University in India (trig, numeric
system, decimal, zero as a number).

1700s CE
------------------

Jump ahead a while and we have something really cool -- Jantar Mantar, a giant
collection of astronomical tools that were created by people with large amounts
of money.

200 BCE - 1300 CE
-------------------

China makes technological advancements steadily and constantly over the course
of a millenium, leading to results that were imported into Europe around the
1500s and in some sense kicked off the Scientific Revolutions.

China is often excluded unnecessarily from this story because their advancements
were mostly technological. They invented a primitive form of the printing press
and some tools for studying chemistry.

1600 BCE and 600 BCE
----------------

Going even further back, we find the Ancient Chinese Oracle Bone, with writing
on it. This course emphasizes that writing didn't just come from Mesoamerica and
Mesopetemia, it was developing all around the world from different cultures. In
600 BCE there is Mayan script

600 - 300 BCE
-----------------

Classical Greece. The main argument of this class is that we shouldn't focus on
this as the big place where all scientific advancements took place.

In 330 BC, we have Aristotle, who dramatically is portrayed as the "enemy" who
Copernicus defeated. In 400 BCE we have Democritus, a philospher who emphasized
atomism (the idea that everything is comprised of a smallest unit called the
atom). For this reason he is sometimes referred to as The Father of Modern
Chemistry (yes, again). The course will argue again that we shouldn't focus on
his contributions because there were interesting advancements going on elsewhere
while he was arguing this.

1500 BCE (?)
------------------

The Venus Tablet is an early record (but not the earliest by far) of
astronomical activity that we have discovered.

3000 BCE
-----------------
Highly simplified rocks with engravings on them that are evidence of scientific
activity and observation.

20000 BCE
----------------
We have an even older artifact with mathematical engravings on them.
The emphasis of all of this is that there's no clear beginning point. we can
keep going back and finding traces of something, and every culture has evidence
of astronomy.

Basically there's no good starting point, either in time or in location.
